PREFACE

IN the darkest year that Europe has known since the
tenth century, being too old and deaf to be of any
active service to the country, I have found myself
invigorated by fresh reading of Homer, Virgil,
Milton, Wordsworth, and some other poets who, like
these, are very old friends. A chance visit from a
scholar who loves his virgil, and happened to drop
an opportune word or two about the “ Gathering of
the Clans‚'’ sent me once more to the seventh Aeneid,
which always brings to mind the quiet, conversa—
tional, but most valuable lectures of my college
tutor, Henry Nettleship, of which I still have the
notes. I need hardly say that a fresh reading re-
vealed new beauties, new secrets; and especially the
“catalogue,’' as it is sometimes injuriously called,
claimed from me a long and enjoyable study, of
which the fruits, such as they are, are contained in
the following pages. Ι hope they may be worth the
attention of scholars, who will find, I think, that
I have not wasted space by setting down anything
that can be found just as well in the best-known
commentaries. I have used the Oxford text edited
by Sir A. Hirtzel in 1904.

V

